Improve testing docs (#3539)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/testing/choosing-a-testing-strategy.md

3. Executing tests against an external resource may involve isolation issues, where tests interfere with one another. For example, multiple tests running in parallel against a database may modify data and cause each other to fail in various ways. Since unit tests run in-memory and don't use shared resources, they're isolated from each other and don't cause interference.

However, unit tests do not guarantee that your program works correctly as a whole; while each component may work well in isolation, various issues may arise when integrating them together. For example, a component may execute some query against a database, expecting certain behavior, while the actual database system behaves differently. Such issues are only uncovered in integration testing, making them an important part of any testing strategy. In addition, since unit tests interact with internal components, they must be reworked as the program is refactored and internal APIs change; integration tests, in contrast, are more stable as they test public, external API contracts.

## Integration testing

> Because of the above difficulties with integration tests, developers are frequently urged to concentrate on unit tests first, and have a robust unit test suite which they can run frequently on their machines; integration tests, in contrast, are supposed to be executed much less frequently, and in many cases also provide far less coverage. We recommend giving more thought to integration tests, and suggest that databases may actually be far less affected by the above problems as much as people tend to think:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of the above difficulties with integration tests, developers are frequently urged to concentrate on unit tests first, and have a robust unit test suite which they can run frequently on their machines; integration tests, in contrast, are supposed to be executed much less frequently, and in many cases also provide far less coverage. We recommend giving more thought to integration tests, and suggest that databases may actually be far less affected by the above problems than people tend to think:
```

## Unit testing

Unlike integration tests, unit tests never involve the actual database system used in production, but rather swap it with a [test double](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_double). Below are some common methods for unit testing EF Core applications with test doubles:

1. Use SQLite (in-memory mode) as a database fake, replacing your production database system.
2. Use the EF Core InMemory provider as a database fake, replacing your production database system.
3. Mock or stub out `DbContext` and `DbSet`.
4. Introduce a repository layer between EF Core and your application code, and mock or stub that layer.

> Below, we'll explore what each method means, and compare it with the others. We recommend reading through the different methods to gain a full understanding, but if you're looking for a quick suggestion, we highly recommend the 4th method: introducing a repository layer.

Reviewer: I still don't think we should say we highly recommend a repository layer.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. Especially with how much the ASP.NET team is trying to simplify application boilerplate and bootstrap.

It would for sure be jarring to someone getting started with .NET server side development.  Consider from their perspective:  Going from a tutorial on ASP.NET telling them how they've lowered the ceremony and then arrive at Entity Framework docs which tell them to strap in for a lot of repository pattern boilerplate.

Most people just want to write LINQ.  The state of the art here is LINQ in mediator listeners/handlers.

Author: This statement is made within the context of the "Unit testing" section, but I agree and will tweak to make this more explicit and nuanced.

@atrauzzi I don't disagree, but that's the reality of the situation. If you (a) insist on doing unit tests (no database involved), and (b) do anything beyond a very restricted subset of queries, then the only way to do this reliably and comprehensively is via a repository layer. If that's unacceptable because it's too complicated/ceremonious, you can test against your real database - but within the above two constraints there's not much else we can say.

Author: Here's what I ended up with for now:

> Below, we'll explore what each method means, and compare it with the others; We recommend reading through the different methods to gain a full understanding of each one. If you've decided that unit tests are required (as opposed to integration tests), than a repository layer is the only approach allowing the comprehensive and reliable stubbing/mocking of the data layer. However, that approach has a significant cost in terms of implementation and maintenance.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense, and I've come to agree. Using the real database is essential without a repository layer. 👍

* The same LINQ query may return different results on different providers. For example, SQL Server does case-insensitive string comparison by default, whereas SQLite is case-sensitive. This can make your unit tests pass where a test against your actual database would fail (or vice versa).
* Some queries which work on SQL Server simply aren't supported on SQLite, because the exact SQL support in these two database differs.
* If your query happens to use a provider-specific method such as SQL Server's [`EF.Functions.DateDiffDay`](xref:core/providers/sql-server/functions#date-and-time-functions), that query will fail on SQLite, and cannot be tested.
* Raw SQL may work, or it may fail or return different results, depending on exactly what is being done. SQL dialects are different in many ways across databases.

> Compared to running integration tests against your production database system, it's relatively easy to get started with SQLite, and so many users do. Unfortunately, the above limitations tend to eventually become problematic when unit testing EF Core applications, even if they don't seem to be at the beginning. As a result, we recommend either concentrating on integration tests, or implementing unit tests via the repository pattern as discussed below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to running integration tests against your production database system, it's relatively easy to get started with SQLite, and so many users do. Unfortunately, the above limitations tend to eventually become problematic when unit testing EF Core applications, even if they don't seem to be at the beginning. As a result, we recommend either concentrating on integration tests, or if unit tests for these things are an absolute necessity, then taking onboard the cost of a repository pattern as discussed below.
```

* Raw SQL is completely unsupported. Compare this with SQLite, where it's possible to use raw SQL, as long as that SQL works in the same way on SQLite and your production database.
* The InMemory provider has not been optimized for performance, and will generally work slower than SQLite in in-memory mode.

In summary, InMemory has all the disadvantages of SQLite, along with a few more - and offers no advantages in return. If you are looking for a simple, in-memory database fake, use SQLite instead of the InMemory provider; but consider using the repository pattern instead as described below.

For information on how to use InMemory for unit testing, see the [unit testing page](xref:core/testing/unit-testing#inmemory).

### Mocking or stubbing DbContext and DbSet

This approach typically uses a mock framework to create a test double of `DbContext` and `DbSet`, and tests against those doubles. Mocking `DbContext` can be a good approach for testing various *non-query* functionality, such as calls to <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.DbContext.Add%2A> or <xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.DbContext.SaveChanges>, allowing you to verify that your code called them in write scenarios.

> However, properly mocking `DbSet` *query* functionality is not possible, since queries are expressed via LINQ operators, which are static extension method calls over `IQueryable`. As a result, when some people talk about "mocking `DbSet`", what they really mean is that they stub `DbSet` out with an in-memory collection, and then evaluate query operators against that collection in memory, just like a simple `IEnumerable`. This isn't the same as actually mocking or stubbing the database, which would involve stubbing out query **end results**, rather than query inputs (i.e. the database table, as represented by a `DbSet`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, properly mocking `DbSet` *query* functionality is extremely difficult, since queries are expressed via LINQ operators, which are static extension method calls over `IQueryable`. As a result, when some people talk about "mocking `DbSet`", what they really mean is that they stub `DbSet` out with an in-memory collection, and then evaluate query operators against that collection in memory, just like a simple `IEnumerable`. This isn't the same as actually mocking or stubbing the database, which would involve stubbing out query **end results**, rather than query inputs (i.e. the database table, as represented by a `DbSet`).
```

Reviewer: Or maybe, "practically impossible". You can do it--you basically write your own LINQ provider for your tests.

Author: Yeah, as I wrote above - I think we're jumping between two definitions of what it means to mock DbSet/query.

I think most people understand this to mean having a DbSet backed by an in-memory collection, and applying Enumerable operators to it (technically faking rather than mocking). That's easy to do, but not really more useful than the in-memory provider.

The 2nd meaning (use a mock/fake LINQ provider) is sort-of what we provide with the in-memory provider; sure, we provide a fake EF provider rather than non-EF LINQ provider, but that's quite similar. Obviously users writing their own LINQ provider makes no sense, and I'm not sure what benefits that would bring over our in-memory provider.

Reviewer: > Users writing their own LINQ provider makes no sense

Exactly.

> Obviously.

To you... :-D

For proper, reliable unit testing, consider introducing a [repository layer](https://martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/repository.html) which mediates between your application code and EF Core. The production implementation of the repository contains the actual LINQ queries and executes them via EF Core. In testing, the repository abstraction is directly stubbed or mocked without needing any actual LINQ queries, effectively removing EF Core from your testing stack altogether and allowing tests to focus on application code alone.

The following diagram compares the database fake pattern (SQLite/InMemory) with the repository pattern:

![Comparison of fake provider with repository pattern](_static/fake-provider-and-repository-pattern.png)

Since LINQ queries are no longer part of testing, you can directly provide query results to your application. Put another way, the previous approaches roughly allow stubbing out *query inputs* (e.g. replacing SQL Server tables with an in-memory one), but then still execute the actual query operators in-memory; the repository pattern, in contrast, allows you to stub out *query outputs* directly, allowing for far more powerful and focused unit testing.

> One possible disadvantage of the repository pattern is that it requires you to architect your application accordingly: application code can no longer execute LINQ queries directly, but must instead call into a repository method, which executes the query (and is stubbed in testing). This can make for a somewhat heavier application architecture, but can also have other advantages: all data access code is concentrated in one place rather than being spread around the application, and if your application needs to support more than one database, the repository abstraction can be very helpful for tweaking queries across providers.

Reviewer: I think it's important to call out even more explicitly the disadvantages of a repository pattern. Maybe something like:

> LINQ is a very powerful feature of .NET. It allows applications to compose complex queries that are translated and executed against the database without the need to shape the data layer to explicitly support these queries. In addition to being powerful, this also provides a great deal of flexibility for the evolution of applications over time.

> Using a repository pattern to facilitate unit testing as described here necessarily prevents applications from using LINQ in this way, since if the repository itself exposes LINQ, then the testing problem has not been solved. This means that there is a significant cost involved in implementing and maintaining a repository. This cost should not be discounted when making a choice on how to test an application, especially given that integration tests for the queries generated by the repository will still be needed anyway.

> It's worth noting that repositories do have advantages outside of just testing. They ensure all data access code is concentrated in one place rather than being spread around the application, and if your application needs to support more than one database, then the repository abstraction can be very helpful for tweaking queries across providers.

Reviewer 2: Also worth mentioning that leaking `IQueryable` while sometimes frowned upon, allows querying to become a minor cross-cutting concern.  To me, this is actually quite powerful, especially given that `IQueryable` is part of the language itself, and so leaking it doesn't create any unwanted dependencies.

( https://chillicream.com/blog/2020/03/18/entity-framework )

Author: @atrauzzi the moment you leak IQueryable, you lose the ability to stub/mock your repository layer - which at least in this context is the main reason for having a repository in the first place... I get what you're saying: if you have a complex query used in multiple places, and you want to compose further operators over it in those places, then yeah, you can wrap it in a method returning IQueryable for further composition. But if you want to preserve the ability to stub out your repository, each use of that query itself must be implemented in a method which *doesn't* return IQueryable, so that it can be stubbed/mocked.

Bottom line, I think this would be more confusing than helpful in this specific conversation, which is about testing/stubbing/mocking (GraphQL is a very specific case which again is somewhat orthogonal to testing).

Author: @ajcvickers I get what you're saying: it's indeed important to stress that testable repositories can't return IQueryable. But  I wouldn't say a repository pattern prevents composing complex queries with different result shapes, or any other composable operators (I think that's what you're saying). The basic limitation is that whatever API your product code uses must itself not return IQueryable; but a repository can have a private Queryable-returning method representing a complex query, and multiple public methods which compose over that (projections, filters, whatever) to return IEnumerable.

You could definitely argue that this is more laborious, as each data shape requires another IEnumerable-returning repository method, but that's just the regular price of the pattern (and different from saying that a repository prevents anything, no?)

I've integrated parts of your suggested text above, and hopefully made it clearer that the repository pattern has a significant implementation/maintenance cost - let me know what you think, am open for further changes.

Reviewer: @atrauzzi I'm in favor of using IQueryable throughout application code. Hence I'm not in favor of the repository pattern. Something that looks like a repository but exposes IQueryable...is DbContext/DbSet. :-)

@roji

> But I wouldn't say a repository pattern prevents composing complex queries with different result shapes, or any other composable operators

I'm explicitly not saying this. I'm saying you have to write and maintain code in the repository to do this. There are good ways to do this. However, they are not IQueryable, and are (necessarily and by-design) more restrictive than IQueryable. This is what you lose/gain from having the repository; not the ability to have parameterized/extendable queries.

## Overall comparison

The following table provides a quick, comparative view of the different testing techniques, and shows which functionality can be tested under which approach:

Feature                             | InMemory     | SQLite in-memory          | Mock DbContext | Repository pattern | Integration testing
----------------------------------- | ------------ | ------------------------- | -------------- | ------------------ | -------------------
Test double type                    | Fake         | Fake                      | Mock/stub      | Mock/stub          | Real, no double
Raw SQL?                            | No           | Depends                   | No             | Yes                | Yes
Transactions?                       | No (ignored) | Yes                       | Yes            | Yes                | Yes
Provider-specific translations?     | No           | No                        | No             | Yes                | Yes
Exact query behavior?               | Depends      | Depends                   | Depends        | Yes                | Yes

> Requires special code architecture? | No           | No                        | No             | Yes                | No

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Requires special code architecture? | No           | No                        | No             | Yes                | No
Restricts the use of LINQ | No | No | No | Yes | No
```

Author: That's an extreme formulation :) I think we're trying to say that all LINQ must be encapsulated behind Enumerable-returning methods (which is what I tried to convey with "Requires special code architecture").

I've replaced "Requires special code architecture" (which was supposed to convey that) with "Can use LINQ anywhere in the application?", where the repository pattern is the only one where the answer is "no" (also added a footnote). Let me know if that seems sufficient.

## Summary

* We highly recommend that developers have good test coverage of their application running against their actual production database system. This provides confidence that the application actually works in production, and with proper design, tests can execute reliably and quickly. Since integration tests are required in any case, it's a good idea to start there, and add unit tests later, based on need.

> * For unit testing, we recommend implementing the repository pattern, allowing you to properly stub or mock out your data access layer above EF Core, rather than via a fake EF Core provider (Sqlite/InMemory) or by mocking `DbSet`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If unit tests for queries are absolutely required, then we recommend implementing the repository pattern, allowing you to properly stub or mock out your data access layer above EF Core, rather than via a fake EF Core provider (Sqlite/InMemory) or by mocking `DbSet`.
```

Author: That's really strong - I tried to not be that categorical about rejecting unit testing. Can we compromise and remove the "absolutely"? :rofl:
